Science Above Politics: Former Skeptics' Defense of Climate Science
Jennifer Rukavina

When Jennifer Rukavina became a television meteorologist, she noticed her colleagues were divided into two camps: believers and nonbelievers. Ms. Rukavina didn’t know at first which camp she fell into, but she certainly wasn’t “convinced” about climate change.

In the early 2000s, when Ms. Rukavina began her career, Al Gore, the former vice president and climate change activist, had just released his film “An Inconvenient Truth.” The split among her colleagues, Ms. Rukavina said, was largely focused around the political “theater” surrounding the film, which experts often describe as a flash point in the deepening partisan divide on climate change.

“I decided that I needed to educate myself, because the meteorologist is often viewed as the station scientist,” Ms. Rukavina said. In 2008, she attended her first Glen Gerberg Weather and Climate Summit — a meeting of weathercasters and climate scientists — in Colorado. After hearing from the scientists themselves, Ms. Rukavina said, she changed her mind.

“I am a registered Republican, but I don’t let politics dictate what good science is to me,” she said. Every year since, Ms. Rukavina has briefed her viewers live from the conference. “It really doesn’t matter to me what my viewers think of climate change,” she said. “What matters to me most is being able to prepare them for the changes that lie ahead.”
Bob Inglis

Bob Inglis was a congressman from one of the most conservative districts in South Carolina, one of the reddest states of the nation. The National Rifle Association endorsed him, and so did the American Conservative Union. For his first six years in Congress, he believed that climate change was, in his own words, “a bunch of hooey.”

Then, Inglis had a change of heart: “When I ran again in 2004, my son had just turned 18 and was voting for the first time. He said to me, ‘Dad, I'll vote for you, but you're gonna clean up your act on the environment.’ So, I listened to my family, got in the House Science Committee, got the opportunity to go to Antarctica, and saw the evidence in the ice core drillings—they show that the Earth's atmosphere has changed, and it's the burning of fossil fuels that has changed it, creating stronger storms and the risk of flooding from higher sea levels.”

Inglis sees protecting Earth’s climate as a conservative priority: “A lot of us conservatives would like to avoid the issue [of climate change], because we assume it means drastic changes and a bigger government. It doesn't have to be that way. The conservative thing to do is to protect our families and nation against this threat. We can create a new energy future that has lots of jobs and lots of wealth creation, and that lights up the world with more energy, more mobility, [and] more freedom.”
