Some people think that climate scientists cannot be trusted. You’d be forgiven for feeling that way, because the fossil fuel industry has bankrolled a multi-decade propaganda campaign specifically designed to stop action on climate change by undermining the public’s trust in climate science and scientists. Initially, in the 1970s and early 1980s, oil companies agreed with academic and federal scientists that burning fossil fuels would lead to climate change; some companies even employed their own climate scientists and conducted in-house climate science research. But as the public and politicians began to wake up to the climate crisis in the early 1990s, instead of alerting the public or taking action, the fossil fuel industry began to attack climate science and scientists. Trust the climate scientists, don’t let oil companies mislead you.
Here are some more details:

Oil companies knew.

Over the past decade, historians and journalists have discovered internal memos from oil companies showing that the oil industry has known since the 1950s that their products could cause dangerous climate change. Oil companies employed and worked with some of the world’s top climate scientists. By 1959–more than 60 years ago–they knew that burning fossil fuels could lead to global warming “sufficient to melt the icecap and submerge New York.” During the 1970s and ‘80s, scientists at one oil giant predicted global warming with breathtaking accuracy and warned executives of “potentially catastrophic” climate effects.

Oil companies lied.

Starting in the late 1980s, oil companies spent the next two decades intentionally misleading the American public with a well-funded disinformation campaign intended to create doubt about climate science and generate mistrust in climate scientists.
The result was a manufactured debate about climate change that undermined public understanding of the scientific consensus that climate change is real and human-caused. The fossil fuel industry’s internal memos made this propaganda strategy explicit: “Emphasize the uncertainty” in climate science and “Reposition global warming as theory (not fact).” Their goal was to confuse the public and policymakers in order to delay action and protect profits.

As part of this attack on the scientific consensus, oil companies issued statements and advertisements falsely claiming that climate science was “unsettled.” They also funded a small but vocal group of contrarian scientists and fake experts to sustain the illusion that there was significant disagreement within the scientific community. From 1986 to 2015, five oil companies alone spent $3.6 billion on advertising. Money also went to lobbying politicians against climate change legislation - outspending environmental groups by 10-to-1.

Oil companies harassed.

Climate scientists themselves also became the victims of an orchestrated smear campaign. For example, when one world-renowned climate scientist, Dr. Benjamin Santer, coauthored a major report concluding that human-caused global warming was underway, he was publicly accused of fraud and corruption by an oil-industry front group. Despite these claims being false and baseless, Dr. Santer faced harassment and threatening emails.
When another prominent climate scientist, Dr. Michael Mann, coauthored research demonstrating rapid global warming over the past century, he was harassed for years by bogus legal complaints filed by organizations funded by fossil fuel interests. Fossil fuel companies used these attacks to misportray climate scientists as untrustworthy and convince the public not to believe their work.

When it comes to climate change, don’t trust the oil companies, trust the climate scientists.


Sources:
Brulle, R.J., Aronczyk, M. & Carmichael, J. (2020). Corporate promotion and climate change: an analysis of key variables affecting advertising spending by major oil corporations, 1986–2015. Climatic Change, 159, 87–101. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-019-02582-8
Center for Climate Integrity. (n.d.). Climate Deception. https://climateintegrity.org/evidence/climate-deception
Cook, J., Supran, G., Lewandowsky, S., Oreskes, N., & Maibach, E. (2019). America misled: How the fossil fuel industry deliberately misled Americans about climate change. George Mason University Center for Climate Change Communication. https://www.climatechangecommunication.org/america-misled/
Oreskes, N., & Conway, E. M. (2011). Merchants of doubt: How a handful of scientists obscured the truth on issues from tobacco smoke to global warming. Bloomsbury Publishing USA.

Supran, G., & Oreskes, N. (2017). Assessing ExxonMobil’s climate change communications (1977–2014). Environmental Research Letters, 12, 084019. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/aa815f
Union of Concerned Scientists. (2017, October 12). How the fossil fuel industry harassed climate scientist Michael Mann. https://www.ucs.org/resources/how-fossil-fuel-industry-harassed-climate-scientist-michael-mann
